docs: logging configuration guide (#6648)
meltano/meltano: docs/src/_tutorials/logging.md

---
title: Logging and Monitoring
description: Learn how to configure logging and monitoring for Meltano.
layout: doc
---

## Logging

Logging in meltano can be controlled via a standard yaml formatted [python logging dict config file](https://docs.python.org/3/library/logging.config.html#configuration-dictionary-schema).

By default, meltano will look for this in a `logging.yaml` file in the project root. However, you can override this by
setting the [environment variable](/guide/configuration#configuring-settings) `MELTANO_CLI_LOG_CONFIG` or by using the
`meltano` CLI option `--log-config`. e.g. `meltano --log-config=my-prod-logging.yaml ...`.

A logging.yaml contains a few key sections that you should be aware of.

- `formatters` - This section contains the formatters that are used by the handlers. This controls the output format of the log messages (e.g. json).

> - `handlers` - This section contains the handlers which are used the loggers. This controls the output destination of the log messages (e.g. the console).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `handlers` - This section contains the handlers which are used by the loggers. This controls the output destination of the log messages (e.g. the console).
```

    (): meltano.core.logging.console_log_formatter
    colors: False
  structured_colored: # log format for structured plain text logs WITH colored output
    (): meltano.core.logging.console_log_formatter
    colors: True
  key_value: # log format for traditional key=value style logs
    (): meltano.core.logging.key_value_formatter
    sort_keys: False
  json: # log format for json formatted logs
    (): meltano.core.logging.json_formatter

handlers:
  console: # log to the console (stderr) using structured_colored formatter, logging everything at DEBUG level and up
    class: logging.StreamHandler
    level: DEBUG
    formatter: structured_colored
    stream: "ext://sys.stderr"
  meltano_log: # log everything INFO and above to a file in the project root called meltano.log in json format
    class: logging.FileHandler
    level: INFO
    filename: meltano.log
    formatter: json
  my_warn_file_handler: # log everything WARNING and above to automatically rotating log file in key_value format
    class: logging.handlers.RotatingFileHandler
    level: WARN
    formatter: key_value
    filename: /tmp/meltano_warn.log
    maxBytes: 10485760
    backupCount: 20
    encoding: utf8

> root:

Reviewer: Can you put in a note above (or as an inline comment) about `root`? In this example file is the first mention of it.

Author: Good catch. My brain immediately assumed "folks will know with the root logger is for" when that's definitely not the case.

Author: Added to description of all sections.

  level: DEBUG
  propagate: yes # propagate to child loggers
  handlers: [console, meltano_log, my_info_file_handler] # by default use these three handlers

loggers:
  somespecific.module.logger: # if you want debug logs for a specific named logger or module
    level: DEBUG
    handlers: [console]
    propogate: no
  urllib3: # for example hide all urllib3 debug logs
    level: WARNING
    handlers: [console, meltano_log]
    propogate: no
```

## Local development config example

> While working with meltano locally it's sometimes nice to have more terse logging on the console, but still have DEBUG

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While working with Meltano locally it's sometimes nice to have more terse logging on the console, but still have DEBUG
```

level info written to a log file behind scenes incase you need to debug something. To accomplish that, you can use a
file like:

```yaml
version: 1
disable_existing_loggers: false

formatters:
  structured_colored:

>     (): meltano.core.logging.console_log_formatter

Reviewer: How does a user know the world of available options here?

Author: Doh good point, will update to document our current options.

Author: updated. pointed at the src file that holds our formatters and listed what they currently are.

For example, to log to a file called `meltano.log` in JSON format, while also reporting WARNING lines and above on
the console you could use the following `logging.yaml` config:

```yaml
version: 1
disable_existing_loggers: false

formatters:
  structured_plain:
    (): meltano.core.logging.console_log_formatter
    colors: False
  json:
    (): meltano.core.logging.json_formatter

handlers:
  console:
    class: logging.StreamHandler
    level: WARNING
    formatter: structured_plain
    stream: "ext://sys.stderr"
  file:
    class: logging.FileHandler
    level: INFO
    filename: meltano.log
    formatter: json

root:
  level: DEBUG
  propagate: yes
  handlers: [console, file]
```

If instead you wanted the console output to log in JSON format because your logging solution is capturing output directly
you could use the following config:

```yaml
version: 1
disable_existing_loggers: false

formatters:
  json:
    (): meltano.core.logging.json_formatter

handlers:
  console:
    class: logging.StreamHandler
    formatter: json
    stream: "ext://sys.stderr"

root:
  level: INFO
  propagate: yes
  handlers: [console]
```

## Datadog logging config

> For Datadog logging you have a couple of options. The easiest approach maybe to simply log to a file in json format and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You have a couple options for structuring logs for Datadog. The easiest approach may be to log to a file in JSON format and
```

Author: This is less "structuring logs for Datadog" and more "configuring logs for Datadog". Mind if I roll with that phrasing ?

sufficient:

```yaml
version: 1
disable_existing_loggers: false

formatters:
  json:
    (): meltano.core.logging.json_formatter

handlers:
  console:
    class: logging.StreamHandler
    level: INFO
    formatter: json
    stream: "ext://sys.stderr"

root:
  level: INFO
  propagate: yes
  handlers: [console]
```

## Log fields

While not a complete dictionary of all fields available in the log, the following are common fields that you may encounter,
and ones that are useful for filter or grouping:

- `level` - The log level.
- `timestamp` - The timestamp of the log entry.
- `event` - The actual log message.
- `name` or `source` - Where the log message originated e.g. `tap-gitlab` if the log message originated from a Tap.
- `stdio` - When the log message originated from a plugin, this field indicates whether the log message originated from stdout or stderr. Allowing you to filter out standard singer events for example.
- `cmd_type` - The type of command that the log message originated from.
- `state_id` - The associated state id.
- `success` - Whether something succeeded or failed.
- `error` - Where possible indicates the error type if one occurred.

## Tips and tricks

> Use `[jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/)` to filter the output of json formatted meltano logs to only show the lines you're interested in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/) to filter the output of JSON formatted Meltano logs to only show the lines you're interested in.
```
